---
lang: en
ecip: 1104
title:  Mystique EVM and Protocol Upgrades
status: Draft
type: Meta
author: Cody Burns (@dontpanicburns)
created: 2021-07-28
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereumclassic/ECIPs/discussions/440
---

### Simple Summary

Enable the outstanding Ethereum Foundation _London_ network protocol upgrades on
the Ethereum Classic network in a hard-fork code-named _Mystique_ to enable
maximum compatibility across these networks.

### Abstract

Add support for a subset of protocol-impacting changes introduced in the
Ethereum Foundation (ETH) network via the _London_ hardforks. The proposed
changes for Ethereum Classic's _London_ upgrade include:

EIP | Eth PR | omit or include
-- | -- | --
3198 (BASEFEE opcode) | #22837 | Include
3529 (Alternative refund reduction) | #22733 | Include
3541 (Reject new contracts starting with the 0xEF byte) | #22809 | Include
1559 (Fee market change) | #22837 #22896 |  Omit
3228 (💣 delay) | #22840 and #22870 | Omit

The fee market change and bomb delay are omitted at this time as they are not applicable for Ethereum Classic. The fee market change puts the network at longterm risk since as ETC currently has a capped supply and fixed emmision epocs. The bomb was disarmed in ETC code base in a previous hardfork. 


#### EIP Summaries and expected action
##### Included
- EIP 3198 "BASEFEE opcode": Adds an opcode that gives the EVM access to the block’s base fee. 
  - For ETC, BASEFEE opcode shall return `0`. This opcode is being added to ensure alignment with evm standards but will not be used on chain. The assumption being that contracts using `BASEFEE` sould do `GASPRICE - BASEFEE` to get the proper value   
- EIP 3529 "Alternative refund reduction" Remove gas refunds for SELFDESTRUCT, and reduce gas refunds for SSTORE to a lower level where the refunds are still substantial, but they are no longer high enough for current “exploits” of the refund mechanism to be viable.
  - gas price should be adjusted on respective opcodes to reflect the new EVM standard   
- EIP 3541 "Reject new contracts starting with the 0xEF byte": Disallow new code starting with the 0xEF byte to be deployed. Code already existing in the account trie starting with 0xEF byte is not affected semantically by this change.
  - No future contracts shall be deployed on chain with `0xEF` prefix. Clients should respond with an error message citing ECIP 1104 as justification of rejection. 

##### Omitted
- EIP 1559 "Fee market change": A transaction pricing mechanism that includes fixed-per-block network fee that is burned and dynamically expands/contracts block sizes to deal with transient congestion.
  - Undesirable to implement at this time as it would conflict with the current monetary policy set in ECIP-1017  
- EIP 3228 "💣 delay": Delays the difficulty bomb to show effect the first week of December 2021.
  - Not applicable to ETC due to difficulty bomb being defused 


This document proposes the following blocks at which to implement these changes
in the Classic networks:

- `Dec 15th 2022` on Mordor Classic PoW-testnet 
- `Jan 5th 2022` on Kotti Classic PoA-testnet 
- `Jan 19th 2022` on Ethereum Classic PoW-mainnet 

For more information on the opcodes and their respective EIPs and
implementations, please see the _Specification_ section of this document.

### Motivation

To enhance the Ethereum Virtual Machine's (EVM) capabilities, various opcodes
shall be added to the Ethereum Classic networks, all of which have been in use
on the Ethereum Foundation networks since early 2021.

Specific to EIP 3529: Refunds are currently only applied after transaction execution, so they cannot affect how much gas is available to any particular call frame during execution. Hence, removing them will not break the ability of any code to execute, though it will render some applications economically nonviable.
#### Gas tokens will become valueless.

### Specification

Technical specifications for each EIP can be found at those documents
respectively:

- [EIP-3198](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3198): BASEFEE opcode
- [EIP-3529](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3529): Alternative refund reduction
- [EIP-3541](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3541): Reject new contracts starting with the 0xEF byte
- [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559): Fee market change
- [EIP-3228](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3228): 💣 delay

### Rationale

__Interoperability__: Establishing and maintaining interoperable behavior
between Ethereum clients is essential for developers and end-user adoption,
yielding benefits for all participating chains (e.g., ETH and ETC, Ropsten and
Mordor, Görli and Kotti).

__Immutability__: None of the introduced new opcodes in the EVM has the
potential to change the behavior of existing contracts; in the case where
previously an arbitrary invalid bytecode would have been deployed to the
network, none of them would be able to modify the state of the Ethereum Classic
networks retrospectively. Adding opcodes to the EVM increases its functionality
and should be considered a feature upgrade rather than a modification.

__Standards Compliance__: In order to guarantee that every EOF-formatted contract in the state is valid, we need to prevent already deployed (and not validated) contracts from being recognized as such format. New code starting with the 0xEF byte will not be deployable, and contract creation will result in a failure. However, given bytecode is executed starting at its first byte, code deployed with 0xEF as the first byte is not executable anyway.

While this means no currently executable contract is affected, it does rejects deployment of new data contracts starting with the 0xEF byte.

### Implementation

Adoption of the content of this ECIP requires a hard fork as it introduces
changes that are not backward compatible.

The following clients with Ethereum Classic support implement the _London_
features currently and will be able to support the _Mystique_ upgrade:

- Core-Geth (maintained by ETC Core)
- Hyperledger Besu (maintained by ConsenSys)

### Proposed Timeline

- make sure draft will be ready and "pre-approved" by the core teams
have some rough consensus to put it in last call ("day X")
- Nov 23 + 2 weeks - move to accepted unless there are issues/concerns
- Dec 15th - Mordor activation
- Jan 5th - Kotti activation
- Jan 26th - Mainnet activation


## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
