---
lang: en
ecip: 1109
title: Spiral EVM and Protocol Upgrades
status: Draft
type: Meta
author: Christos Ziogas <chris@etccooperative.org>, Diego López León <diego@etccooperative.org>, Isaac Ardis <isaac@etccooperative.org>
created: 2023-05-10
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereumclassic/ECIPs/discussions/511
---

### Simple Summary
Enable the outstanding Ethereum Foundation **Shangai** network protocol upgrades on the Ethereum Classic network in a hard-fork code-named Spiral to enable maximum compatibility across these networks.

### Abstract
Add support for a subset of protocol-impacting changes introduced in the Ethereum Foundation (ETH) network via the _Shangai_ network upgrade. The proposed changes for Ethereum Classic's _Spiral_ upgrade include:

EIP | Description | Status
-- | -- | --
4399 | Supplant DIFFICULTY opcode with PREVRANDAO | Compatible inclusion
3651 | Warm COINBASE | Include
3855 | PUSH0 instruction | Include
3860 | Limit and meter initcode |  Include
6049 | Deprecate SELFDESTRUCT | Include
4895 | Beacon chain push withdrawals as operations | Omit

Beacon chain withdrawals are omitted at this time as they are not applicable for Ethereum Classic. 

#### EIP Summaries and expected action
##### Included
- EIP 3651 "Warm COINBASE": Lowers the price of accessing the _coinbase_ account following the access list framework introduced in [EIP-2929](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929).
- EIP 3855 "PUSH0 instruction": Introduces the PUSH0 (0x5f) instruction, which pushes the constant value 0 onto the stack.
- EIP-3860 "Limit and meter initcode": Limits the maximum size of initcode to 49152 bytes and apply extra gas cost of 2 for every 32-byte chunk of initcode

##### Compatible inclusion
- EIP 4399 "Supplant DIFFICULTY opcode with PREVRANDAO": Historicaly, the DIFFICULTY (0X44) instruction was used as a source of pseudo randomness. With the switch to Proof of Stake, Ethereum removed the work difficulty so, as a replacement, they now expose a [RANDAO](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/block-proposal/#random-selection) value taken from the beacon chain. Since v0.8.18, Solidity [deprecates](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.18/cheatsheet.html#global-variables) the `block.difficulty` and replaces it with `block.prevrandao` but this syntactic change still compiles to the same EVM opcode, i.e. `0x44`, which in the Ethereum Classic network will continue to work with the aforementioned _block difficulty_.

##### Omitted
- EIP 4895 "Beacon chain push withdrawals as operations": In Proof of Stake networks, enable validator withdrawals from the beacon chain to the EVM
- Ethereum Classic network only grants rewards through Proof of Work mining on the canonical chain, there are no validators, so this doesn't apply.

This document proposes the following blocks at which to implement these changes in the Ethereum Classic networks:

- `9_000_000` on Mordor Classic testnet (TBD)
- `18_000_000` on Ethereum Classic mainnet (TBD)

For more information on the opcodes and their respective EIPs and implementations, please see the _Specification_ section of this document.

### Motivation

To enhance the Ethereum Virtual Machine's (EVM) capabilities, various opcodes shall be added to the Ethereum Classic networks, all of which have been in use on the Ethereum Foundation networks since late 2022.

### Specification

Technical specifications for each EIP can be found at those documents respectively:

- [EIP-4399](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4399): Supplant DIFFICULTY opcode with PREVRANDAO
- [EIP-3651](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3651): Warm COINBASE
- [EIP-3855](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3855): PUSH0 instruction
- [EIP-3860](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3860): Limit and meter initcode
- [EIP-6049](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6049): Deprecate SELFDESTRUCT
- [EIP-4895](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4895): Beacon chain push withdrawals as operations

### Rationale

__Interoperability__: Establishing and maintaining interoperable behavior between Ethereum clients is essential for developers and end-user adoption, yielding benefits for all participating chains (e.g., ETH and ETC, Sepholia and Mordor).

__Immutability__: None of the introduced new opcodes in the EVM has the potential to change the behavior of existing contracts. Adding opcodes to the EVM increases its functionality and should be considered a feature upgrade rather than a modification.

While this means no currently executable contract is affected, it states deployment of new data contracts starting with the 0xEF byte.

### Implementation

Adoption of the content of this ECIP requires a hard fork as it introduces changes that are not backward compatible.

The following clients with Ethereum Classic support implement the _Mystique_ features currently and will be able to support the _Spiral_ upgrade:

- Core-Geth (maintained by ETC Cooperative)
- Hyperledger Besu (maintained by ConsenSys)

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
