---
lang: en
ecip: 1068
title: Account Versioning Extension for Contract Creation Transaction
author: Wei Tang (@sorpaas)
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereumclassic/ECIPs/issues/169
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2019-06-24
requires: 1040
---

## Simple Summary

Specification for an extension of ECIP-1040 to allow contract creation
transaction to create multiple versions.

## Abstract

This ECIP defines an extension to the base layer of account versioning
(ECIP-1040) to allow multiple account versions to be used in contract
creation transaction. Although this is not necessary at this moment,
it will once we have multiple independent VMs (such as eWasm).

## Motivation

The base account versioning layer only allows contract of the
newest version to be deployed via contract creation transaction. This
is a reasonable assumption for current Ethereum network, because most
of new features added to EVM are additions, and developers almost
never want to deploy contracts that are not of the newest version. In
this section, we provide an extension to allow multiple versions of
contracts to be deployed via contract creation transaction.

## Specification

Add an additional field `version` (256-bit integer) in contract
creation transaction. So it becomes `nonce`, `gasprice`, `startgas`,
`to`, `value`, `data`, `v`, `r`, `s`, `version`. When signing or
recovering, sign ten items, with `v`, `r`, `s` as defined by EIP-155.

The transaction would be executed with the *code's version* in
`version` supplied, and deploys contract of `version`. If `version` is
not supported or *validation* does not pass, return out-of-gas.

## Rationale

By providing the additional field `version`, a contract creation
transaction can specify which version it wants to deploy. In case of
two independent VMs such as EVM and eWASM, we can allow two
`LATEST_VERSION`s to be specified -- one for EVM and another for
eWASM. Both of them then can deploy new contracts via transactions.

## Backwards Compatibility

This ECIP only changes transaction formats and does not change any VM
execution logic, thus it has no backwards compatibility issue.

## Test Cases

Not yet provided.

## Implementation

Not yet implemented.

## Copyright

This work is licensed under [Apache License, Version
2.0](http://www.apache.org/licenses/).
