---
lang: en
ecip: 1076
title: Mining Algorithm Signaling Process
author: Talha Cross (@soc1c)
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereumclassic/ECIPs/issues/174
status: Active
type: ECBP
created: 2019-11-16
---

### Abstract
This meta document is agnostic to any mining algorithm. Its sole purpose is specifying a process for miners to signal their preferred mining algorithm for Ethereum Classic.

### Motivation
The decision to change the Ethereum Classic mining algorithm - or to keep it as is - is not an easy one to make. It should be done by broad consensus with all stakeholders involved - miners, investors, application and core developers, and anyone else who feels they have a stake in ETC. This meta document proposes a process of how miners could signal in favor of one potential change of the mining algorithm and parameters.

### Available Options
Currently, the following options are debatable.

- **ECBP-1076-A**: _"Ethash Status Quo."_ The mining algorithm will be untouched as it is since genesis, as **Ethash** function with a statically **increasing DAG**.
- **ECBP-1076-B**: _"Ethash Limited DAG."_ The mining algorithm will be untouched as it is since genesis, as **Ethash** function. However, the **DAG size will be limited** as specified in [ECIP-1043](https://ecips.ethereumclassic.org/ECIPs/ecip-1043).
- **ECBP-1076-C**: _"Keccak256 (SHA3)."_ The mining algorithm will be **changed to Keccak256** as specified in [ECIP-1049](https://ecips.ethereumclassic.org/ECIPs/ecip-1049).
- ~~**ECBP-1076-D**: _"ProgPoW."_ The mining algorithm will be **changed to ProgPow** as specified in [ECIP-1070](https://ecips.ethereumclassic.org/ECIPs/ecip-1070).~~ 

    _Note: ProgPoW was rejected by the community on Nov/20, 2019. However, miners can still signal for this option if they prefer this over the other options._

Eventually, the miners have to signal in favor of one option.

### Signaling Process
Solo miners, mining farms, and mining pools can signal support by adjusting their mining node to signal in favor of one of the proposals that was promoted to "Last Call" state in the previous stage. Details on the signaling can be found in the subsequent subsections.

The signaling process shall be considered finished once more than **70% of the last 1_000_000 blocks** were signed with a signal in favor of one proposal.

##### Miner Extradata Prefix
The miner signaling is specified as follows: The miner prepend the miner's extra data with 5 bytes of signaling data which shall be recorded in the Ethereum Classic block headers. The 5 bytes contain the following:

1. Two start bytes that indicate a signal in terms of ECBP-1076, namely `76` (`0x37 0x36`)
2. One option byte that favors one of the proposals:
    - `A` (`0x41`): ECBP-1076-A _(optional)_
    - `B` (`0x42`): ECBP-1076-B
    - `C` (`0x43`): ECBP-1076-C
    - `D` (`0x44`): ECBP-1076-D
3. Two numeric bytes that vote on the default gas limit as specified in [ECIP-1047](https://ecips.ethereumclassic.org/ECIPs/ecip-1047).
    - `00` (`0x30 0x30`): abstain / don't care _(optional)_
    - `01` (`0x30 0x31`): support ECIP-1047 client defaults with 1 million gas block gas limit
    - `08` (`0x30 0x38`): reject ECIP-1047 client defaults, explicitly supporting the 8 million gas block gas limit defaults
    - `99` (`0x39 0x39`): any other number between `00` and `99` suggests a competing default block gas limit

In addition to the numeric vote on the gas limit with the extra data field, mining nodes are encouraged to utilize block gas target limit voting with the suitable configuration flags for their mining nodes.

No signaling abstains from voting and shall not be regarded as favoring the status quo.

##### Mining Node Configuration Examples
The following configuration examples do not favor one option over another and only serve the purpose of demonstration.

A Parity Ethereum node configured to vote for Keccak256 (ECBP-1076-C) not caring about the block gas limit:

```
parity --extra-data "76C00 Happy Trigger Farm" [OPTIONS]
```

A Multi-Geth node configured to vote for Ethash with DAG size limit (ECBP-1076-B) and a 1 million block gas limit (ECIP-1047):

```
geth --miner.extradata "76B01 Funny Classic Pool" --miner.gaslimit 1000000 [OPTIONS]
```
A Besu node configured to vote for ProgPoW (ECBP-1076-D) and an increase of the block gas limit:

```
besu --miner-extra-data="76D15 LOL-lonely Miner 1337" --target-gas-limit=15000000 [OPTIONS]
```

### Implementation
All clients implement custom extra data and block gas limit target voting. No custom implementation is required.

### Copyright/Licensing
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
