---
lang: en
ecip: 1103
title: Magneto EVM and Protocol Upgrades
status: Last Call
review-period-end: 2021-06-04
type: Meta
author: Afr Schoe (@q9f)
created: 2021-02-09
discussions-to: https://github.com/ethereumclassic/ECIPs/issues/412
---

### Simple Summary

Enable the outstanding Ethereum Foundation _Berlin_ network protocol upgrades on
the Ethereum Classic network in a hard-fork code-named _Magneto_ to enable
maximum compatibility across these networks.

### Abstract

Add support for a subset of protocol-impacting changes introduced in the
Ethereum Foundation (ETH) network via the _Berlin_ hardforks. The proposed
changes for Ethereum Classic's _Berlin_ upgrade include:

- Reprices the gas cost of the `ModExp` (`0x00..05`) precompile.
- Increases gas cost for `SLOAD`, `*CALL`, `BALANCE`, `EXT*`, and
  `SELFEDESTRUCT` when used for the first time in a transaction.
- Defines a new transaction type that is an envelope for future transaction
  types.
- Adds a transaction type which contains an access list, a list of addresses
  and storage keys that the transaction plans to access.

This document proposes the following blocks at which to implement these changes
in the Classic networks:

- `3_985_893` on Mordor Classic PoW-testnet (June 2nd, 2021)
- `4_368_634` on Kotti Classic PoA-testnet (June 9th, 2021)
- `13_189_133` on Ethereum Classic PoW-mainnet (July 21st, 2021)

For more information on the opcodes and their respective EIPs and
implementations, please see the _Specification_ section of this document.

### Motivation

To enhance the Ethereum Virtual Machine's (EVM) capabilities, various opcodes
shall be added to the Ethereum Classic networks, all of which have been in use
on the Ethereum Foundation networks since early 2021.

### Specification

Technical specifications for each EIP can be found at those documents
respectively:

- [EIP-2565](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2565): ModExp Gas Cost
- [EIP-2929](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2929): Gas cost increases for
  state access opcodes
- [EIP-2718](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2718): Typed Transaction
  Envelope
- [EIP-2930](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2930): Optional access lists

### Rationale

__Interoperability__: Establishing and maintaining interoperable behavior
between Ethereum clients is essential for developers and end-user adoption,
yielding benefits for all participating chains (e.g., ETH and ETC, Ropsten and
Mordor, Görli and Kotti).

__Immutability__: None of the introduced new opcodes in the EVM has the
potential to change the behavior of existing contracts; in the case where
previously an arbitrary invalid bytecode would have been deployed to the
network, none of them would be able to modify the state of the Ethereum Classic
networks retrospectively. Adding opcodes to the EVM increases its functionality
and should be considered a feature upgrade rather than a modification.

### Implementation

Adoption of the content of this ECIP requires a hard fork as it introduces
changes that are not backward compatible.

The following clients with Ethereum Classic support implement the _Berlin_
features currently and will be able to support the _Magneto_ upgrade:

- Core-Geth (maintained by ETC Core)
- Hyperledger Besu (maintained by ConsenSys)

The Mantis client (maintained by IOHK) plans to eventually support the upgrade, but will not so do by the time of the hardfork.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via
[CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
