### What is an ECIP?

    ECIP: 1049
    Title: Change the ETC Proof of Work Algorithm to Keccak256
    Status: Draft
    Type: Meta
    Author: Alexander Tsankov (alexander.tsankov@colorado.edu)
    Created: 2019-01-08

### Abstract
A proposal to replace the current Ethereum Classic proof of work algorithm with Keccak-256.

### Motivation
* A response to the recent double-spend attacks against Ethereum Classic. Most of this hashpower was rented or came from other chains, specfically Ethereum (ETH). A seperate proof of work algorithm would encourage the development of a specialized Ethereum Classic mining community, and blunt the ability for attackers to purchase mercenary hash power on the open-market. 

* As a secondary benefit, deployed smart contracts and dapps running on chain are currently able to use `keccak256()` in their code. This ECIP could open the possibility of smart contracts being able to evaluate chain state, and simplify second layer (L2) development.

### Specification

### Reason 1: Similarity to Bitcoin
The Bitcoin network currently uses the CPU-intensive SHA256 Algorithm to evaluate blocks. When Ethereum was deployed it used a different algorithm, Dagger-Hashimoto, which eventually became Ethash on 1.0 launch. Dagger-Hashimoto was explicitly designed to be memory-resistant with the goal of ASIC resistance [1]. It has been provably unsuccessful at this goal, with Ethash ASICs currently easily availalble on the market.

A CPU-intensive algorithm like Keccak256 would allow both the uniquness of a fresh PoW algorithm that has not had ASICs developed against it, while at the same time allowing for organic optimization of a dedicated and financially commited miner base, much the way Bitcoin did with its own SHA256 algorithm.

If Ethereum Classic is to succeed as a project, we need to take what we have learned from Bitcoin and move towards CPU-hard PoW algorithms.

> At first, most users would run network nodes, but as the network grows beyond a certain point, it would be left more and more to specialists with server farms of specialized hardware. - Satoshi Nakamoto (2008-11-03) [2]

*Note: Please consider this is from 2008, and the Bitcoin community at that time did not differentiate between node operators and miners. I interpret "network nodes" in this quote to refer to miners, and "server farms of specialized hardware" to refer to mining farms.*


### Reason 2: Value to Smart Contract Developers
In Solidity, developers have access to the `keccak256()` function, which allows a smart contract to efficiently calculate the hash of a given input. This has been used in a number of interesting projects launched on both Ethereum and Ethereum-Classic. Most Specifcally a project called OxBitcoin [3] - which the ERC-918 spec was based on.

0xBitcoin is a security-audited [4] dapp that allows users to submit a proof of work hash directly to a smart contract running on the Ethereum blockchain. If the sent hash matches the given requirements, a token reward is trustlessly dispensed to the sender, along with the contract reevaulating difficulty parameters. This project has run successfully for over 10 months, and has minted over 3 million tokens [5].

With the direction that Ethereum Classic is taking: a focus on Layer-2 solutions and cross-chain compatability; being able to evaluate proof of work on chain, will be tremendously valuable to developers of both smart-contracts and node software writers. This could greatly simplify interoperability. 

### Implementation

Work in Progress


### References: 

1. https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Dagger-Hashimoto#introduction
1. https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/emails/cryptography/2/
1. https://github.com/0xbitcoin/white-paper
1. https://github.com/EthereumCommonwealth/Auditing/issues/102
1. https://etherscan.io/address/0xb6ed7644c69416d67b522e20bc294a9a9b405b31
