### Title

    ECIP: 1012
    Title: Traverse all Accounts and Increment Nonce
    Author: Elaine Ou <elaine@ethereumclassic.org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standard
    Created: 2016-09-28

### Abstract
This ECIP describes the process of traversing all accounts in the existing state DB to increment the nonce by a large number ```n```. Also, new accounts will be initialized with nonce ```n```.

### Motivation
A nonce is a scalar value equal to the number of transactions sent by the sender.

in order to prevent replay attacks, every transaction must have a "[nonce](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Design-Rationale)", such that the account keeps track of the nonces used and only accepts a transaction if its nonce is 1 after the last nonce used.

By drastically increasing the starting nonce for all Ethereum Classic accounts, we ensure that all transactions broadcast from the Ethereum-HardFork network cannot be accepted in Ethereum Classic. Similarly, all transactions broadcast from the Ethereum Classic network will have too high of a nonce to be included in any blocks in the Ethereum-HardFork network.

### Specification
Ethereum Classic accounts will have a new starting nonce of ```n```, where ```n=2**21```. This keeps Ethereum Classic separate from Ethereum-HardFork, where accounts have a starting nonce of ```0```, and the Morden Testnet, where accounts have a starting nonce of ```2**20```.

The Ethereum StateDB tracks all state accounts in a merkle trie. The Trie iterator will be used to cycle through accounts and increment the nonce. The StateDB will also be modified to return ```n``` as the starting nonce for new accounts.

The trigger block is expected to be at ```3000000```, which is the HardForking block for delaying the Difficulty Bomb. 
