## Title

    ECIP: 1025
    Title: Precompiled Contracts for zkSNARK Verification
    Author: Wei Tang <hi@that.world>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Consensus (hard-fork)
    Created: 2017/06/29

<br />

## Motivation

Precompiled contracts for elliptic curve and pairing operations are required in order to perform zkSNARK verification within the block gas limit.

## Abstract

zkSNARK verification will allow anonymous transaction to be executed on the Ethereum Classic network. See [this](https://github.com/zcash/babyzoe/blob/master/zoe/contract/mixer.sol) for how a simple mixer contract can be implemented using zkSNARK verification. This ECIP implements three primitive operations in order to perform zkSNARK verification. This allows changes of zkSNARK algorithms without requiring another hard fork.

The general benefit of zkSNARKs for Ethereum and Ethereum Classic is that it will increase the privacy for users (because of the Zero-Knowledge property) and might also be a scalability solution (because of the succinctness and efficient verifiability property).

This combines [EIP-212](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/212) and [EIP-213](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/213).

## Specification for Addition and Scalar Multiplication on the Elliptic Curve alt_bn128

Add precompiled contracts for point addition (ADD)  and scalar multiplication (MUL) on the elliptic curve "alt_bn128".

Address of ADD: 0x6
Address for MUL: 0x7

The curve is defined by:
```
Y^2 = X^3 + 3
over the field F_p with
p = 21888242871839275222246405745257275088696311157297823662689037894645226208583
```

### Encoding

Field elements and scalars are encoded as 32 byte big-endian numbers. Curve points are encoded as two field elements `(x, y)`, where the point at infinity is encoded as `(0, 0)`.

Tuples of objects are encoded as their concatenation.

For both precompiled contracts, if the input is shorter than expected, it is assumed to be virtually padded with zeros at the end (i.e. compatible with the semantics of the `CALLDATALOAD` opcode). If the input is longer than expected, surplus bytes at the end are ignored.

The length of the returned data is always as specified (i.e. it is not "unpadded"). 

### Exact semantics

Invalid input: For both contracts, if any input point does not lie on the curve or any of the field elements (point coordinates) is equal or larger than the field modulus p, the contract fails. The scalar can be any number between `0` and `2**256-1`.

#### ADD
Input: two curve points `(x, y)`.
Output: curve point `x + y`, where `+` is point addition on the elliptic curve `alt_bn128` specified above.
Fails on invalid input and consumes all gas provided.

#### MUL
Input: curve point and scalar `(x, s)`.
Output: curve point `s * x`, where `*` is the scalar multiplication on the elliptic curve `alt_bn128` specified above.
Fails on invalid input and consumes all gas.

### Gas costs

To be determined.

### Specification for Optimal Ate Pairing Check on the Elliptic Curve alt_bn128

Add a precompiled contracts for a bilinear function on groups on the elliptic curve "alt_bn128". We will define the precompiled contract in terms of a discrete logarithm. The discrete logarithm is of course assumed to be hard to compute, but we will give an equivalent specification that makes use of elliptic curve pairing functions which can be efficiently computed below.

Address: 0x8

For a cyclic group `G` (written additively) of prime order q let `log_P: G -> F_q` be the discrete logarithm on this group with respect to a generator `P`, i.e. `log_P(x)` is the integer `n` such that `n * P = x`.

The precompiled contract is defined as follows, where the two groups `G_1` and `G_2` and their generators `P_1` and `P_2` are defined below (they have the same order `q`):

```
Input: (a1, b1, a2, b2, ..., ak, bk) from (G_1 x G_2)^k
Output: If the length of the input is incorrect or any of the inputs are not elements of
        the respective group or are not encoded correctly, the call fails.
        Otherwise, return one if
        log_P1(a1) * log_P2(b1) + ... + log_P1(ak) * log_P2(bk) = 0
        (in F_q) and zero else.
```

Note that `k` is determined from the length of the input. `k == 0` is valid and results in returning one.

In order to check that an input is an element of `G_1`, verifying the encoding of the coordinates and checking that they satisfy the curve equation (or is the encoding of infinity) is sufficient. For `G_2`, in addition to that, the order of the element has to be checked to be equal to the group order `q = 21888242871839275222246405745257275088548364400416034343698204186575808495617`.

### Definition of the groups

The groups `G_1` and `G_2` are cyclic groups of prime order `q = 21888242871839275222246405745257275088548364400416034343698204186575808495617` on the elliptic curve `alt_bn128` defined by the curve equation
`Y^2 = X^3 + 3`.

The group `G_1` is a cyclic group on the above curve over the field `F_p` with `p = 21888242871839275222246405745257275088696311157297823662689037894645226208583` with generator `P1 = (1, 2)`.

The group `G_2` is a cyclic group on the same elliptic curve over a different field `F_p^2 = F_p[i] / (i^2 + 1)` (p is the same as above) with generator
```
P2 = (
  11559732032986387107991004021392285783925812861821192530917403151452391805634 * i +
  10857046999023057135944570762232829481370756359578518086990519993285655852781,
  4082367875863433681332203403145435568316851327593401208105741076214120093531 * i +
  8495653923123431417604973247489272438418190587263600148770280649306958101930
)
```


### Encoding

Elements of `F_p` are encoded as 32 byte big-endian numbers. An encoding value of `p` or larger is invalid.

Elements `a * i + b` of `F_p^2` are encoded as two elements of `F_p`, `(a, b)`.

Elliptic curve points are encoded as a Jacobian pair `(X, Y)` where the point at infinity is encoded as `(0, 0)`.

Note that the number `k` is derived from the input length.

The length of the returned data is always exactly 32 bytes and encoded as a 32 byte big-endian number. 

### Gas costs

[Benchmarks run on cpp-ethereum](https://gist.github.com/chriseth/4168b56bfe638cae8da1945dd988600b)

suggest the following gas formula:

`60000 * k + 40000`

if we target 20000 gas per millisecond.

Awaiting benchmarks from other implementations.

## Rationale

The specific curve `alt_bn128` was chosen because it is particularly well-suited for zkSNARKs, or, more specifically their verification building block of pairing functions. Furthermore, by choosing this curve, we can use synergy effects with ZCash and re-use some of their components and artifacts.

The feature of adding curve and field parameters to the inputs was considered but ultimately rejected since it complicates the specification: The gas costs are much harder to determine and it would be possible to call the contracts on something which is not an actual elliptic curve.

A non-compact point encoding was chosen since it still allows to perform some operations in the smart contract itself (inclusion of the full y coordinate) and two encoded points can be compared for equality (no third projective coordinate).

## Backwards Compatibility

As with the introduction of any precompiled contract, contracts that already use the given addresses will change their semantics. Because of that, the addresses are taken from the "reserved range" below 256.

## Implementation

### Optional Ate Pairing Check

The precompiled contract can be implemented using elliptic curve pairing functions, more specifically, an optimal ate pairing on the alt_bn128 curve, which can be implemented efficiently. In order to see that, first note that a pairing function `e: G_1 x G_2 -> G_T` fulfills the following properties (`G_1` and `G_2` are written additively, `G_T` is written multiplicatively):

(1) `e(m * P1, n * P2) = e(P1, P2)^(m * n)`
(2) `e` is non-degenerate

Now observe that
```
log_P1(a1) * log_P2(b1) + ... + log_P1(ak) * log_P2(bk) = 0
```
if and only if
```
e(P1, P2)^(log_P1(a1) * log_P2(b1) + ... + log_P1(ak) * log_P2(bk)) = e(P1, P2)
```

Furthermore, the left hand side of this equation is equal to
```
e(log_P1(a1) * P1, log_P2(b1) * P2) * ... * e(log_P1(ak) * P1, log_P2(bk) * P2)
= e(a1, b1) * ... * e(ak, bk)
```

And thus, the precompiled contract can be implemented by verifying that
`e(a1, b1) * ... * e(ak, bk) = e(P1, P2)`
