### Title

    ECIP: 1017
    Title: Correct References To SHA3 Which Should Be Keccak-256
    Author: Christian Seberino <christian.seberino@iohk.io>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standard
    Created: 2017-01-25

### Abstract

Due to the SHA3 parameter controversy involving late changes to the standard,
and even later backpedaling of those changes, Ethereum and Ethereum Classic
ended up using a similar but different hash function from the Keccak family that
is today referred to as Keccak-256.  There are several places where the
Keccak-256 is incorrectly referred to as SHA3 which will continue to cause
confusion until it is addressed.  As a simple start, I am proposing an alias to
sha3 of keccak256.  This will have the added benefit of being
inline with corresponding Ethereum Improvement Proposals such as EIP-59.

### Motivation

Accuracy is vital to good software.  Incorrectness will only lead to problems.
Ignoring this error will lead to neverending ongoing confusion in both Ethereum
and Ethereum Classic such as
[here](http://ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/559/why-arent-solidity-sha3-hashes-not-matching-what-other-sha3-libraries-produce).

### Specification

Probably the most visible error involving this issue is in the JSONRPC web3
module.  An alias of web3_keccak256 to web3_sha3 would be an easy
hugely beneficial start.  Deprecation warnings could eventually be added to
web3_sha3 with eventual removal from the standard.

### Rationale

This problem will not go away.  Ethereum is already taking steps to address this
and there is no reason to stay incorrect in Ethereum Classic.
[Solidity 0.4.3](https://media.readthedocs.org/pdf/solidity/stable/solidity.pdf)
for Ethereum introduced the keccak256 alias for sha3.

### Implementation

N
