ERC: 23
Title: Token standard
Author: Dexaran, dexaran820@gmail.com
Status: Draft
Type: ERC
Created: 5-03.2017
Resolution: https://github.com/Dexaran/ERC23-tokens

#Abstract

The following describes standard functions a token contract and contract working with specified token can implement.

#Motivation

Those will allow dapps and wallets to handle incoming token transactions and prevent accidentally sent tokens from being accepted by wrong contracts.
For example decentralized exchange will no more need to force users to call approve at token contract then call deposit that is calling transferFrom taking allowed tokens. Token transaction will automatically be handled inside the exchange contract.

The most important here are, transferToContract and fallbackToken.

#Specification

Token
Contracts that work with tokens

#Methods

NOTE: An important point is that contract developers should handle fallbackToken like fallback() for ether transactions if they wish their contracts to work with specified tokens. Token senders should understand if they are sending tokens to address or to contract.

transferToContract

function transferToContract(address _to, uint _value) returns (bool success)
transfers tokens from msg.sender to _to then trying to call fallbackToken(msg.sender, _value) at _to. If _to is not a contract or no fallbackToken is specified or _to is not supporting transfered tokens transaction fails and tokens will not be sent.

Contract to work with tokens

supportedTokens

mapping (address => bool) supportedTokens;
Mapping of addresses of token contracts that are supported.

addToken

function addToken(address _token) onlyOwner
Adds a token contract address to work with.

function fallbackToken(address _from, uint _value)
A function to handle token transfers that is called from token contract when token holder is sending tokens. _from is a token holder and _value is amount of incoming tokens. Works like fallback function for Ether transactions.
