##Title

    ECIP: 1021
    Title: Token standard
    Author: Dexaran, <dexaran820@gmail.com>
    Status: Draft
    Type: ERC
    Created: 7-03.2017
    Resolution: https://github.com/Dexaran/ERC23-tokens
    
    EIP #223 on Ethereum project: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/223
   
## Abstract

The following describes standard functions a token contract and contract working with specified token can implement to prevent accidentally sends of tokens to contracts and make token transactions behave like ether transactions.

## Motivation

Two problems of ERC20 that ERC23 will solve: 
1. When you are sending tokens receiver will never know that transaction appears. Addresses don't care about it while contracts my need to handle transactions.
2. Tokens could be sent to another contract address where would not be accessible anymore.

Those will allow dapps and wallets to handle incoming token transactions and prevent accidentally sent tokens from being accepted by contracts.
For example decentralized exchange will no more need to force users to call `approve` at token contract then call `deposit` that is calling `transferFrom` taking allowed tokens. Token transaction will automatically be handled inside the exchange contract.

The most important here are, `transferToContract` and `fallbackToken`.

## Specification

Token
Contracts that work with tokens

## Methods

NOTE: An important point is that contract developers should handle `fallbackToken` like fallback for ether transactions if they wish their contracts to work with specified tokens.

## Token contract methods
isContract

`function isContract(address _addr) private returns (bool is_contract)`
private function that assembles `extcodesize(_addr)` and returns `true` if code size is greater than 0. It's needed to choose which function to use `transferToAddress` or `transferToContract` depending on is the reveiver a contract or not.

transferToContract

`function transferToContract(address _to, uint _value) private returns (bool success)`
private function that transfers tokens from `msg.sender` to `_to` then trying to call `fallbackToken(msg.sender, _value)` at `_to`.

transferToAddress

function transferToAddress(address _to, uint _value) private returns (bool success)
private function similar to base ERC20 `transfer`

transfer

`function transfer(address _to, uint _value) returns (bool success)`
function that is always called when someone wants to transfer tokens. Calls `transferToAddress` or `transferToContract` depending on is the reveiver an address or a contract.

## Contract to work with tokens

supportedTokens

`mapping (address => bool) supportedTokens;`
Mapping of addresses of token contracts that are supported.

addToken

`function addToken(address _token)`
Allows a token contract address to work with.

removeToken

`function removeToken(address _token)`
Makes a given token contract address no more allowed to work with.

`function fallbackToken(address _from, uint _value)`
A function to handle token transfers that is called from token contract when token holder is sending tokens. `_from` is a token holder and `_value` is amount of incoming tokens. Works like fallback function for Ether transactions.
