### Title

    ECIP: 1031
    Title: Recursive Length Prefix Media Type
    Author: Wei Tang <hi@that.world>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standard
    Layer: Meta
    Created: 2017-08-29
    
### Abstract

Recursive Length Prefix (see [Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf) Appendix B) is the data type used for all common Ethereum Classic structures including blocks, raw transactions, receipts and accounts. Defining a media type for Recursive Length Prefix (RLP) would allow a RESTful HTTP server to return raw RLP information directly. This is more efficient than the current JSON format for RPC calls.

### Specification

Define a new media type according to RFC6838 under `application/vnd.ecip.rlp` ([IANA media type assignment](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ecip.rlp)). This media type has no required or optional parameters. It uses binary encoding. The specification for RLP can be found at [Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf) Appendix B.

### Example

*Note this section is only served as an example of how this media type might be used, and is not part of the specification.*

A client can implement a RESTful API that returns RLP binary data directly. We use the routes below, that partially implements the functionality of the current JSON RPC protocol.

* `GET /{0xhex or number or latest or pending}`: returns RLP binary data of a given block.
* `GET /{0xhex or number or latest or pending}/transactions/{0xhex or number}`: returns RLP binary data of a transaction.
* `GET /{0xhex or number or latest or pending}/receipts/{0xhex or number}`: returns RLP binary data of a transaction receipt.
* `PUT /pending/transactions`: accepts a raw RLP transaction input, and put it into the transaction mempool.
* `GET /{0xhex or number or latest or pending}/accounts/{0xhex}`: returns the RLP binary data of an account.
