<pre>
  ECIP: 1037
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Simple Interactive URI Scheme
  Author: Cody Burns <dontpanic@codywburns.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 20170909
</pre>

This ECIP is based off BIP 0021 can be referenced at https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0021.mediawiki

==Abstract==
This ECIP proposes a URI scheme for interacting with ethereum contract and accounts in a uniform standard format. 

==Motivation==
The purpose of this URI scheme is to enable users to easily make payments and interact with smart contracts by simply clicking links on webpages or scanning QR Codes. This allows for nfc, qr codes, or other similar non-interactive devices to store and transmit a standard message to a user, as well as interactive applications such as websites and dApps to present simple data to a user for action 

==Specification==

=== General rules for handling (important!) ===

ETC clients MUST NOT act on URIs without getting the user's authorization.
They SHOULD require the user to manually approve each payment individually, though in some cases they MAY allow the user to automatically make this decision.
ETC clients SHOULD include the message field describing the actions of the code.

=== Operating system integration ===
Graphical ethereum clients SHOULD register themselves as the handler for the "ethereum:" URI scheme by default, if no other handler is already registered. If there is already a registered handler, they MAY prompt the user to change it once when they first run the client.

=== General Format ===

Ethereum URIs follow the general format for URIs as set forth in RFC 3986. The path component consists of an Ethereum address, and the query component provides additional payment options.

Elements of the query component may contain characters outside the valid range. These must first be encoded according to UTF-8, and then each octet of the corresponding UTF-8 sequence must be percent-encoded as described in RFC 3986.

=== ABNF grammar ===

 ethereumurn     = "ethereum:" ethereumaddress & ethereumchainid [ "?" ethereumparams ]
 ethereumaddress = *hexdig
 ethereumchainid = "id=" *digit
 ethereumparams  = ethereumparam [ "&" ethereumparams ]
 ethereumparam   = [ amountparam / gasparam / gaslimitparm / nonceparam / codeparam / labelparam / messageparam / otherparam / reqparam]
 amountparam     = "amount=" *digit [ "." *digit ]
 gasparam        = "gas=" *digit
 gaslimitparm    = "glmt=" *digit
 nonceparam      = "n=" *digit
 codeparam       = "code=" *hexdig
 labelparam      = "label=" *qchar
 messageparam    = "message=" *qchar
 otherparam      = qchar *qchar [ "=" *qchar ]
 reqparam        = "req-" qchar *qchar [ "=" *qchar ]

Here, "qchar" corresponds to valid characters of an RFC 3986 URI query component, excluding the "=" and "&" characters, which this ECIP takes as separators.

The scheme component ("ethereum:") is case-insensitive, and implementations must accept any combination of uppercase and lowercase letters. The rest of the URI is case-sensitive, including the query parameter keys.

=== Query Keys ===

*address: ethereum account or contract address in hexidecimal 
*id: eip 155 compliant chainid, used for sanity check 
*amount = amount of ether to transfer, denominated in ETC
*gas = gas price
*gaslmt = amount of gas transaction is not to exceed
*nonce = account nonce 
*code = byte code data for transaction
*label: Label for that address (e.g. name of receiver)
*message: message that describes the transaction to the user ([[#Examples|see examples below]])
*(others): optional, for future extensions


=== EIP 155 Transaction === 

The intent of the uri is to pass all information nessecarry for forming a raw transaction to another device or service for signing. 

A raw transaction should map the uri functions as follows for RLP encoding:

 var rawTX = {
        nonce = nonceparam,
        gasprice =  gasparam,
        gaslimit = gaslimitparam,
        to =  ethereumaddress,
        value = amountparam * 10**18,
        data = codeparam,
        v = ethereumchainid,
        r = '',
        s = ''
        }

The parameters labelparam, messageparam, otherparam, and reqparam are not used in transaction signing and can be optionally displayed to the user to pass additional information about the transaction. 

        
==== Transfer amount/size ====

If an amount is provided, it MUST be specified in decimal ETC.
All amounts MUST contain no commas and use a period (.) as the separating character to separate whole numbers and decimal fractions.
I.e. amount=50.00 or amount=50 is treated as 50 ETC, and amount=50,000.00 is invalid.

ETC clients MAY display the amount in any format that is not intended to deceive the user.
They SHOULD choose a format that is foremost least confusing, and only after that most reasonable given the amount requested.
For example, so long as the majority of users work in ETC units, values should always be displayed in ETC by default, even if wei would otherwise be a more logical interpretation of the amount.

=== ENS addresses ===

The Ethereum Name Service is a protocol and ABI definition that provides flexible resolution of short, human-readable names to service and resource identifiers. This permits users and developers to refer to human-readable and easy to remember names, and permits those names to be updated as necessary when the underlying resource (contract, content-addressed data, etc) changes.

ENS names must conform to the following syntax:

 <domain> ::= <label> | <domain> "." <label>
 <label> ::= any valid string label per [UTS46](http://unicode.org/reports/tr46/)

For the specification of the URI, <label> resolves into the following ethereumchainid:

{|  class="wikitable" style="text-align: left;"
|-
! scope="col" width="width:20em;" | TLD
! scope="col" width="width:20em;" | Chain_ID
! scope="col" width="width:20em;" | Chain
|-
|.eth
|1
|Ethereum mainnet
|-
|.exp
|2
|Expanse mainnet
|-
|.rsk
|30
|Rootstock mainnet
|-
|.etc
|61
|Ethereum Classic mainnet
|-
|}

=== Bytecode Transactions ===

Events and functions in evm contracts are / can be preformatted to know functions in the underlying contract. The first four bytes of the call data for a function call specifies the function to be called. It is the first (left, high-order in big-endian) four bytes of the Keccak (SHA-3) hash of the signature of the function. This information along, with the appropriate hex encoded data to pass, form the bytecode.

====Example====

Contract C is at 0xdeadbeef... and has the following psudo function:


 function getETC(){
    require(block.number-payoutDrip >= payoutRate);
    msg.sender.transfer(dropValue);   
    }

Contract C requires no inputs and only requires enough gas to preform its functions. The byte code for this function can be derived using `web3` as:
 
  web3.sha3("getETC()");

which yeilds:
 
 0x023b88685d10d29e0bf0563e4ab1b9d8fc8333c166705be5538c4b079cdd9af0

The information that will be passed in the byte code field would then be:
 
 code=0x023b8868

The entire URi could be:
          
 ethereum:0xdeadbeefdeadbeefdeadbeefdeadbeefdeadbeef&id=61?code=0x023b8868


Bytecode specifications can be found in their respective documentation.

== Rationale ==

===Payment identifiers, not person identifiers===
Current best practices are that a unique address should be used for every transaction.
Therefore, a URI scheme should not represent an exchange of personal information, but a one-time payment or function call.

===Accessibility (URI scheme name)===
Should someone from the outside happen to see such a URI, the URI scheme name already gives a description.
A quick search should then do the rest to help them find the resources needed to make their payment.
Other proposed names sound much more cryptic; the chance that someone googles that out of curiosity are much slimmer.
Also, very likely, what he will find are mostly technical specifications - not the best introduction to ETC.

===Contract Code===

It is not the intent of this ECIP to define every possible contract code that could be implimented.
Higher level functionality would be provided by the site creating the URI qr code and, for lack of a better term,
black box it to the application scanning the code. As generating qr-codes is trivial on an application compared to 
the hazard of unlocking a private key, an application should be able to produce a URI that is functionally similar 
to a standard transaction without the account specific details.

Best practices in function codes shold be adhered to and this ECIP should remain forward compatable.
It is recommended that dApps should make effort to include in the message what is being accomplished in the code.


==Forward compatibility==
Variables which are prefixed with a req- are considered required.  If a client does not implement any variables which are prefixed with req-, it MUST consider the entire URI invalid.  Any other variables which are not implemented, but which are not prefixed with a req-, can be safely ignored.

==Backward compatibility==
As this ECIP is written, several clients already implement a ethereum: URI scheme similar to this one, however usually without the additional "req-" prefix requirement.  Thus, it is recommended that additional variables prefixed with req- not be used in a mission-critical way until a grace period of 6 months from the finalization of this ECIP has passed in order to allow client developers to release new versions, and users of old clients to upgrade.

== Appendix ==

=== Simpler syntax ===

This section is non-normative and does not cover all possible syntax.
Please see the BNF grammar above for the normative syntax.

[foo] means optional, &lt;bar&gt; are placeholders

 <nowiki>ethereum:<address>&id=<chainid>[?amount=<amount>][&gas=<startGas>][&glmt=<gaslimit>][&n=<nonce>][&code=<data>][&label=<label>][&message=<message>]</nowiki>

=== Examples ===

Just the address:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61

Address with name:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?label=DontPanic

Request 20.30 ETC to "DontPanic":
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?amount=20.3&label=DontPanic

Request 42.30 ETC to "DontPanic" with gas:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?amount=20.3&gas=21000&label=DontPanic

Request 50 ETC with message:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?amount=50&label=DontPanic&message=Purchase%20token%20for%20project%20xyz%20ICO

Request a function call in a contract:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?amount=50&code=0x2066726f6d204a656666204761727a696b20666f7220746f6b656e206d696e74

Some future version that has variables which are (currently) not understood and required and thus invalid:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?req-somethingyoudontunderstand=50&req-somethingelseyoudontget=999

Some future version that has variables which are (currently) not understood but not required and thus valid:
 ethereum:0xCe5ED529977b08f87CBc207ebC216859820461eE&id=61?somethingyoudontunderstand=50&somethingelseyoudontget=999

Characters must be URI encoded properly.

== Reference Implementations ==

=== Libraries ===

=== References ===

BIP 21: Bitcoin URI Scheme
https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0021.mediawik

ERC: Standard URI scheme with metadata, value and byte code
https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/67

RFC 3986
https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt

EIP 155: Simple replay attack protection
https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-155.md

EIP 137: Ethereum Domain Name Service - Specification
https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-137.md

Solidity in depth
http://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/abi-spec.html#examples

Ethereum Yellow Paper
http://yellowpaper.io/
