### ECIP-1054: Support for ETH Byzantium EVM and Protocol Upgrades

    ECIP: 1054
    Title: Support for ETH Byzantium EVM and Protocol Upgrades
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Author: Isaac Ardis <isaac.a@etclabs.org>
    Created: 2019-02-11

### Simple Summary

Enable the Ethereum Foundation network protocol _Byzantium_ upgrades on the Ethereum Classic network.

### Abstract

Add support for a subset of protocol-impacting changes introduced in the Ethereum Foundation (ETH) network via the _Byzantium_ hardfork. The proposed changes include:

- Byzantium EVM opcodes, namely:
  - `REVERT` (EIP-140)
  - `RETURNDATASIZE` and `RETURNDATACOPY` (EIP-211)
  - `STATICCALL` (EIP-214)
- Byzantium EVM precompiled contracts, namely:
  - addition and scalar multiplication on the elliptic curve alt_bn128 (EIP-196)
  - optimal ate pairing check on the elliptic curve alt_bn128 (EIP-197)
  - bigint modular exponentiation (EIP-198)
- Replacing the intermediate state root field in transaction receipts with the contract return status (EIP-658).
- Change difficulty adjustment to target mean block time including uncle (EIP-100)

This document proposes the following blocks at which to implement these changes in the Classic networks:

- `X_XXX_XXX` on Ethereum Classic mainnet
- `X_XXX_XXX` on Morden Classic testnet
- `X_XXX_XXX` on Kotti Classic testnet

For more information on the opcodes and their respective EIPs and implementations, please see the __History__ section of this document.

### Motivation

To enhance the EVM's capabilities, various opcodes and precompiled contracts will be added to the Ethereum Classic networks, all of which have been in use on the Ethereum Foundation networks since late 2017. Adoption of the _receipt status_ feature provides a helpful method for decentralized-application developers to access the successful or failed state of a contract. This would establish a greater level of interoperability between Foundation and Classic Ethereum Virtual Machines ("EVM"s), and make a wider array of tooling available for the ETC network (e.g., Solidity version, contract debugging tools). The proposed change to the difficulty formula ensures that the difficulty adjustment algorithm targets a constant average rate of blocks produced including uncles, and so ensures a highly predictable issuance rate that cannot be manipulated upward by manipulating the uncle rate.

### Specification

Technical specifications for each EIP can be found at those documents respectively:

- [EIP 100](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-100) (Change difficulty adjustment to target mean block time including uncles)
- [EIP 140](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-140) (REVERT instruction in the Ethereum Virtual Machine)
- [EIP 196](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-196) (Precompiled contracts for addition and scalar multiplication on the elliptic curve alt_bn128)
- [EIP 197](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-197) (Precompiled contracts for optimal ate pairing check on the elliptic curve alt_bn128)
- [EIP 198](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-198) (Precompiled contract for bigint modular exponentiation)
- [EIP 211](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-211) (New opcodes: RETURNDATASIZE and RETURNDATACOPY)
- [EIP 214](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-214) (New opcode STATICCALL)
- [EIP 658](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-658) (Embedding transaction status code in receipts)

### Rationale

This protocol specification notably omits the scheduled features of the anticipated _Constantinople_ fork, which would be expected to include various further EVM upgrades. The reasoning for this omission hinges on a hedge toward battle-testing of those changes in light of multiple delays of that fork ([here](https://medium.com/ethereum-cat-herders/a-post-mortem-report-the-constantinople-ethereum-hard-fork-postponement-dd780d7ae63d), a postmortem of the latest delay)  due to security and implementation discrepancies.

__Interoperability__: establishing and maintaining interoperable behavior between Ethereum clients is important for developers and end-user adoption, yielding benefits for all participating chains (eg. ETH and ETC).

__On Immutability__: Introducing new opcodes in the VM has the potential to change behavior of existing contracts; in the case where previously an arbitrary invalid bytecode series (yielding _invalid opcode_) would now be assigned a meaning, and thus could generate or return a value other than _invalid_. In essence, this means "possibly making music where there was only noise before." There is a concern that this behavior change contradicts an essential promise of Immutability, since an existing failing smart contract is liable to become a succeeding (not failing) contract, albeit in a hypothetical case of extreme coincidence and gross misuse of an opcode. In counterargument to this concern are two critical points:

1. account states remain unchanged
2. the "Homestead" hardfork established a precedent for this type of change, having introduced the `DELEGATECALL` opcode at block 1,150,000.

With these arguments in place, along with precedence and expectation for other continuing and varied consensus-impacting protocol upgrades (eg soft- and hard-forks), it follows that the definition of Immutability is not extended to guarantee perfect consistency for future _behavior_ of historical account states, but only to only to guarantee the immutability of the account states themselves.

Adding opcodes and precompiled contracts to the EVM increases its functionality (only in an extremely rare case of gross misuse would be seen to _change_ it's functionality), and should be considered a feature upgrade rather than a modification.

### Implementation

Adoption of the content of this ECLIP requires a hard fork, and herein that adoption is proposed to be scheduled for block X,XXX,XXX roughly estimated to arrive _XXXX-XX-XX_.

The `ethereumproject/go-ethereum` client implemented an API-only (non-consensus impacting) partial adoption of EIP-658 receipt status code change via the [v5.5.0](https://github.com/ethereumproject/go-ethereum/releases/tag/v5.5.0) release, and this proposal would augment that change to extend through to the RLP encoding (and thus modify consensus protocol).

ETC Labs Core advocates and supports the adoption of [ethoxy/multi-geth](https://github.com/ethoxy/multi-geth) as a fully-featured and maintenance-scheduled client for this fork and beyond.

### History

##### Byzantium changes

These changes were introduced in the `ethereum/go-ethereum` client via the [1.7 "Megara" release](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/releases/tag/v1.7.0).

These changes are catalogued via the EIP process in the following:

- EIP-658: Transaction receipts embedding status code instead of intermediate state root field - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/658/files

- EIP-100: Change difficulty adjustment to target mean block time including uncles - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/100

- EIP-140: `REVERT` - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/206/files

> The `REVERT` instruction provides a way to stop execution and revert state changes, without consuming all provided gas and with the ability to return a reason.


- EIP-211: `RETURNDATASIZE`, `RETURNDATACOPY` - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/211/files

> A mechanism to allow returning arbitrary-length data inside the EVM has been requested for quite a while now. Existing proposals always had very intricate problems associated with charging gas. This proposal solves the same problem while at the same time, it has a very simple gas charging mechanism and requires minimal changes to the call opcodes. Its workings are very similar to the way calldata is handled already; after a call, return data is kept inside a virtual buffer from which the caller can copy it (or parts thereof) into memory. At the next call, the buffer is overwritten. This mechanism is 100% backwards compatible.


- EIP-214: `STATICCALL` - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/214/files

> To increase smart contract security, this proposal adds a new opcode that can be used to call another contract (or itself) while disallowing any modifications to the state during the call (and its subcalls, if present).

- EIP-198: Precompiled contract for modular exponentiation - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/198/files

- EIP-212: Precompiled contract for elliptic curve pairing - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/212/files

- EIP-213: Precompiled contracts for elliptic curve addition and scalar multiplication - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/213/files
